DOCSP-41959 - Connection Options (#112)
mongodb/docs-php-library: source/connect/connection-options.txt

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Connection Option
     - Description

   * - :manual:`directConnection </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.directConnection>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+bool-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['directConnection' => true];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``directConnection=true``
   
   * - :manual:`replicaSet </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.replicaSet>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+string-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['replicaSet' => 'replicaSetName'];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``replicaSet=replicaSetName``
   
Connection Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TLS Options
```````````
To learn about the TLS options available in the {+driver-short+}, see the
:ref:`TLS <php-tls>` page.

Timeout Options
```````````````

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Connection Option
     - Description

   * - :manual:`connectTimeoutMS </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.connecttimeoutms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}

>        | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['connectTimeoutMS' => 20000];``
>        | **Connection URI Example**: ``connectTimeoutMS=20000``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['connectTimeoutMS' => 2000];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``connectTimeoutMS=2000``
```

Lowering this to two seconds. The PHP driver defaults to 10 seconds, which is frankly too conservative. Better to demonstrate a reduction to help users "fail fast".

   * - :manual:`socketTimeoutMS </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.sockettimeoutms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}

>        | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['socketTimeoutMS' => 400000];``
>        | **Connection URI Example**: ``socketTimeoutMS=400000``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['socketTimeoutMS' => 20000];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``socketTimeoutMS=20000``
```

Likewise, this defaults to 300000 (five minutes). In practice, that actually exceeds PHP's own default [`max_execution_time`](https://www.php.net/manual/en/info.configuration.php#ini.max-execution-time) of 30 seconds, so it's likely PHP itself would kill the script before the driver gave up waiting for a server response.

Let's reduce this to 20 seconds just to demonstrate something more reasonable.

       
       .. code-block:: php

          $uriOptions = [
              'readPreferenceTags' => [
                  ['dc' => 'ny', 'rack' => 'r1'],
                  [],
              ],
          ];
        
       **Connection URI Example**: ``readPreferenceTags=dc:ny,rack:r1&readPreferenceTags=``

Authentication Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To learn about the authentication options available in the {+driver-short+}, see
:ref:`Authentication Mechanisms. <php-auth>`

Server Selection and Discovery Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Connection Option
     - Description
   
   * - :manual:`localThresholdMS </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.localthresholdms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['localThresholdMS' => 20];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``localThresholdMS=20``

   * - :manual:`serverSelectionTimeoutMS </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.serverselectiontimeoutms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}

>        | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['serverSelectionTimeoutMS' => 5000];``
>        | **Connection URI Example**: ``serverSelectionTimeoutMS=40000``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['serverSelectionTimeoutMS' => 5000];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``serverSelectionTimeoutMS=5000``
```

These should be consistent.

   * - :manual:`serverSelectionTryOnce </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.serverselectiontryonce>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+bool-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['serverSelectionTryOnce' => false];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``serverSelectionTryOnce=false``

   * - :manual:`heartbeatFrequencyMS </reference/connection-string-options/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.heartbeatfrequencyms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}

>        | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['heartbeatFrequencyMS' => 50000];``
>        | **Connection URI Example**: ``heartbeatFrequencyMS=50000``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = ['heartbeatFrequencyMS' => 30000];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``heartbeatFrequencyMS=30000``
```

Halving the default value of 60 seconds.

.. _php-connection-options:

==========================
Specify Connection Options
==========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: connection string, URI, server, Atlas, settings, configure

Overview
--------

This page describes the MongoDB connection and authentication options
available in the {+driver-short+}.

Set Connection Options
----------------------

You can configure your connection by specifying options in the connection URI or by
passing them to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor.

.. _php-connection-uri:

Using the Connection URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you pass a connection URI to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor, you can include
connection options in the URI as ``<name>=<value>`` pairs. In the following example,

> the connection URI contains the ``tls`` option with a value of ``true`` and the
> ``tlsCertificateKeyFile`` option with a value of ``/path/to/file.pem``:

Reviewer 2: S: to avoid "with":
```suggestion
the connection URI sets the ``tls`` option to ``true`` and the
``tlsCertificateKeyFile`` option to ``/path/to/file.pem``:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/connect/connection-options.php
   :language: php
   :copyable: true
   :start-after: // start-connection-uri
   :end-before: // end-connection-uri
   :emphasize-lines: 4, 7

.. _php-client-object:

Using a MongoDB\\Client Object
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can pass connection options to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor
instead of including them in your connection URI.
Configuring the connection this way makes it easier to
change settings at runtime and helps you catch errors during compilation.

> The following example shows how to use the the ``$uriOptions`` parameter of the

Reviewer 2: I:
```suggestion
The following example shows how to use the ``$uriOptions`` parameter of the
```

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Connection Option
     - Description
   
   * - :manual:`appName </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.appname>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+string-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'appName' => 'myApp' ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``appName=myApp``

   * - :manual:`retryReads </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.retryreads>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+bool-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'retryReads' => false ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``retryReads=false``

   * - :manual:`retryWrites </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.retrywrites>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+bool-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'retryWrites' => false ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``retryWrites=false``
   
   * - :manual:`loadBalanced </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.loadbalanced>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+bool-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'loadBalanced' => true ];``

>        | **Connection URI Example**: ``loadBalanced=false``

Reviewer 2: S: [nit] match the value in the MongoDB\Client example
```suggestion
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``loadBalanced=true``
```

   * - :manual:`srvMaxHosts </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.srvmaxhosts>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'srvMaxHosts' => 5 ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``srvMaxHosts=5``

API Documentation
-----------------

For more information about the types used on this page, see the following API
documentation:

- :ref:`MongoDB\Client <php-mongodbclient>`

> - `MongoDB\\Driver\\ReadPreference <https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.mongodb-driver-readpreference.php>`__

Reviewer 2: Q: should we separate the PHP manual pages from the MongoDB-hosted API docs, or just group them together as "API documentation"? I separated them in [this PR](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-php-library/pull/110/files#diff-ac016ef66e1fc636f4229cf8150ad9db6ce31e2baa5a814de779ddbe5ad227a0R170-R180), for example, but open to either

.. _php-connection-options:

==========================
Specify Connection Options
==========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: connection string, URI, server, Atlas, settings, configure

Overview
--------

This page describes the MongoDB connection and authentication options
available in the {+driver-short+}.

Set Connection Options
----------------------

You can configure your connection by specifying options in the connection URI or by
passing them to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor.

.. _php-connection-uri:

Using the Connection URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you pass a connection URI to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor, you can include
connection options in the URI as ``<name>=<value>`` pairs. In the following example,
the connection URI sets the ``tls`` option to ``true`` and the

> ``tlsCertificateKeyFile`` option to ``/path/to/file.pem``:

Author: added a note

Using a MongoDB\\Client Object
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can pass connection options to the ``MongoDB\Client`` constructor
instead of including them in your connection URI.
Configuring the connection this way makes it easier to
change settings at runtime and helps you catch errors during compilation.

The following example shows how to use the ``$uriOptions`` parameter of the
``MongoDB\Client`` constructor to set connection options:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/connect/connection-options.php
   :language: php
   :copyable: true
   :start-after: // start-client-options 
   :end-before: // end-client-options
   :emphasize-lines: 5-8, 11

.. note::
   
   If you specify an option in both the ``MongoDB\Client`` object and in the connection
   URI, the value in the ``MongoDB\Client`` object takes precedence.

Connection URI Options
----------------------

The following sections describe the options that you can set for your connection to
MongoDB. Each connection option links to its corresponding
entry in the {+mdb-server+} manual. 

Replica Set Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Connection Option
     - Description

>    * - :manual:`directConnection </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.directConnection>`

Author: good catch; it looks like they reorganized the connection string options docs since this PR was created.

     - | **Data Type**: `MongoDB\\Driver\\ReadPreference <https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.mongodb-driver-readpreference.php>`__
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'readPreference' => 'secondaryPreferred' ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``readPreference=secondaryPreferred``
   
   * - :manual:`maxStalenessSeconds </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.maxstalenessseconds>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'maxStalenessSeconds' => 30 ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``maxStalenessSeconds=30``

   * - :manual:`readPreferenceTags </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.readpreferencetags>`
     - | **Data Type**: ``array``
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**:
       
       .. code-block:: php

          $uriOptions = [
            'readPreferenceTags' => [
              [ 'region' => 'east' ],
              [ 'region' => 'west']
            ]
          ];``
        
       **Connection URI Example**: ``readPreferenceTags=region:east,region:west``

> Authentication Options

Reviewer: [GSSAPI](https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/auth/auth.md#gssapi) supports a few mechanism properties, two of which were originally top-level URI options before being deprecated: `gssapiServiceName` and `canonicalizeHostname` (still documented for [`Manager::__construct()`](https://www.php.net/manual/en/mongodb-driver-manager.construct.php)).

[MONGODB-AWS](https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/auth/auth.md#mongodb-aws) also supports a `AWS_SESSION_TOKEN` property, but I see that wasn't demonstrated in https://github.com/mongodb/docs-php-library/pull/139 (cc: @norareidy).

       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**:
       | ``$uriOptions = [ 'authMechanismProperties' => 'AWS_SESSION_TOKEN:12345' ];``
       | 
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``authMechanismProperties=AWS_SESSION_TOKEN:12345``

   * - :manual:`authSource </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.authsource>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+string-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'authSource' => 'admin' ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``authSource=admin``

Server Selection and Discovery Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Connection Option
     - Description
   
   * - :manual:`localThresholdMS </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.localthresholdms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'localThresholdMS' => 20 ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``localThresholdMS=20``

   * - :manual:`serverSelectionTimeoutMS </reference/connection-string/#mongodb-urioption-urioption.serverselectiontimeoutms>`
     - | **Data Type**: {+int-data-type+}

>        | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'serverSelectionTimeoutMS' => 40000 ];``
>        | **Connection URI Example**: ``serverSelectionTimeoutMS=40000``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       | **MongoDB\\Client Example**: ``$uriOptions = [ 'serverSelectionTimeoutMS' => 5000 ];``
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``serverSelectionTimeoutMS=5000``
```

PHP defaults to 30000 (i.e. 30 seconds), which is already quite high but comes from a time when replica set elections took a lot longer. I'd suggest using 5000 here. Even though we're not explaining the specifics, it'd be helpful to present something more reasonable to the user.

Most applications would want to tune this value smaller to "fail fast" anyway -- particularly PHP apps.
